.. _USAGE:

==========
Using FiPy
==========

This document explains how to use :term:`FiPy` in a practical sense.
To see the problems that :term:`FiPy` is capable of solving, you can
run any of the scripts in the :ref:`examples <part:examples>`.

.. note::

   We strongly recommend you proceed through the :ref:`examples
   <part:examples>`, but at the very least work through
   :mod:`examples.diffusion.mesh1D` to understand the notation and
   basic concepts of :term:`FiPy`.

We exclusively use either the unix command line or IPython_ to
interact with :term:`FiPy`. The commands in the :ref:`examples
<part:examples>` are written with the assumption that they will be
executed from the command line. For instance, from within the main
:term:`FiPy` directory, you can type::

    $ python examples/diffusion/mesh1D.py

A viewer should appear and you should be prompted through a series of
examples.

.. note::

   From within IPython_, you would type::

       >>> run examples/diffusion/mesh1D.py

In order to customize the examples, or to develop your own scripts, some
knowledge of Python syntax is required.  We recommend you familiarize
yourself with the excellent `Python tutorial`_ [PythonTutorial]_ 
or with `Dive Into Python`_ [DiveIntoPython]_.

.. _Python tutorial: http://www.nist.gov/cgi-bin/exit_nist.cgi?url=http://docs.python.org/tut/tut.html
.. _Dive Into Python: http://www.nist.gov/cgi-bin/exit_nist.cgi?url=http://diveintopython.org

As you gain experience, you may want to browse through
:ref:`FlagsAndEnvironmentVariables` to learn about flags and
environment variable that affect :term:`FiPy`.

.. _ENVIRONMENT:

-----------------------
Development Environment
-----------------------

It is often preferable to not formally install packages in the system
directories. The reasons for this include:

 * developing or altering the package source code,

 * trying out a new package along with its dependencies without
   violating a working system,

 * dealing with conflicting packages and dependencies,

 * or not having admin privileges.

The simplest way to use a :term:`Python` package without installing it
is to work in the base directory of the unpacked package and set the
``PYTHONPATH`` environment variable to "``.``". In order to work in an
directory other than the package's base directory, the ``PYTHONPATH``
environment variable must be set to "``~/path/to/package``". This
method of working is adequate for one package, but quickly becomes
unmanageable with multiple :term:`Python` packages. In order to manage
multiple packages, it is better to choose a standard location other
than the default installation path. See the `Privileges`_ section for
details on this approach.

An alternative to setting the ``PYTHONPATH`` is to employ one of the
utilities that manage package and their dependencies independently of
the system package manager and the system directories. These utilities
include Stow_, Virtualenv_ and zc.buildout_ amongst others. Here we'll
describe the use of Virtualenv_, which we highly recommend.

.. _Stow: http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/stow/
.. _zc.buildout: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/zc.buildout

Privileges
==========

If you do not have administrative privileges on your computer, or if
for any reason you don't want to tamper with your existing
:term:`Python` installation, most packages (including :term:`FiPy`)
will allow you to install to an alternative location.  Instead of
installing these packages with ``python setup.py install``, you would
use :samp:`python setup.py install --home={dir}`, where :samp:`{dir}`
is the desired installation directory (usually "``~``" to indicate
your home directory).  You will then need to append
:file:`{dir}/lib/python` to your :envvar:`PYTHONPATH` environment
variable.  See the `Alternate Installation`_ section of the
:term:`Python` document "`Installing Python Modules`_"
[InstallingPythonModules]_ for more information, such as circumstances
in which you should use :option:`--prefix` instead of
:option:`--home`.

.. _Alternate Installation: http://www.nist.gov/cgi-bin/exit_nist.cgi?url=http://docs.python.org/inst/alt-install-windows.html

.. _Installing Python Modules: http://www.nist.gov/cgi-bin/exit_nist.cgi?url=http://docs.python.org/inst/

Virtualenv
==========

http://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv

Virtualenv_ enables the installation of packages in multiple isolated
environments. It organizes the installation of :term:`Python` packages
especially well and also provides a handy location for installing
non-:term:`Python` packages. In addition Virtualenv_ works seamlessly
with the :ref:`PyPI` package manager (``pip``).  To install
Virtualenv_ use the system package manager or use :ref:`PyPI`::

    $ pip install virtualenv

An important addition to Virtualenv_ is Virtualenvwrapper_. Install it
with::

    $ pip install virtualenvwrapper

In general, the above commands require admin privileges, but once a
virtual environment is created, admin privileges are no longer
required. Virtualenvwrapper_ needs to be initialized with::

    $ source virtualenvwrapper.sh

Then a ``fipy`` working environment can be created::

    $ mkvirtualenv fipy
    $ workon fipy

If the :ref:`REQUIREDPACKAGES` have been installed, :term:`Fipy` can
be installed with::

    $ pip install fipy

or establish a :term:`FiPy` development environment in an unpacked
archive with::

    $ python setup.py develop

The :term:`FiPy` development environment allows the source code to be
altered in place and executed without issuing further installation
commands.

.. _Virtualenvwrapper: http://www.nist.gov/cgi-bin/exit_nist.cgi?url=http://www.doughellmann.com/projects/virtualenvwrapper

IPython
=======

http://ipython.scipy.org/

This interactive Python shell is nicer to use than the default, and
integrates nicely with Matplotlib_. Depending on the platform, you may
be able to download a binary or build from source.


------------
Testing FiPy
------------

For a general installation, :term:`FiPy` can be tested by running::

    $ python -c "import fipy; fipy.test()"

This command runs all the test cases in :ref:`FiPy's modules
<part:modules>`, but doesn't include any of the tests in :ref:`FiPy's
examples <part:examples>`. To run the test cases in both :ref:`modules
<part:modules>` and :ref:`examples <part:examples>`, use::

    $ python setup.py test

in an unpacked :term:`FiPy` archive. The test suite can be run with a
number of different configurations depending on which solver suite is
available and other factors. See the
:ref:`FlagsAndEnvironmentVariables` section for more details.

The :term:`FiPy` test suite is implemented so that test execution is
dependent on the environment. The test suite will show warnings when
the environment is missing :ref:`OPTIONALPACKAGES`. For example, if
:term:`Mayavi` and :term:`Gmsh` are not installed the warning would
be::

    !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
    Skipped 131 doctest examples because `gmsh` cannot be found on the $PATH
    Skipped 42 doctest examples because the `tvtk` package cannot be imported
    !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Although the test suite may show warnings, there should be no errors.
Any errors should be investigated or reported on the `tracking
system`_. Users can see if there are any known problems for the latest
:term:`FiPy` distribution by checking `FiPy's automated test
display`_.

.. _FiPy's automated test display: http://build.cmi.kent.edu:8010/console
.. _tracking system: http://matforge.org/fipy/newticket

Below are a number of common `Command-line Flags`_ for testing various
:term:`FiPy` configurations.
 
Inline Tests
============

If the :mod:`scipy.weave` package is installed, try running the tests
using::

    $ python setup.py test --inline

or::

    $ python -c "import fipy; fipy.test('--inline')"

A few tests will fail the first time as a result of the messages
output in the course of caching the compiled inline code, but a repeat
test should have no failures (although see "``repairing catalog by
removing key``" in the :ref:`FAQ`).

Parallel Tests
==============

If :term:`FiPy` is configured for :ref:`PARALLEL`, you can run the tests 
on multiple processor cores with::

    $ mpirun -np {# of processors} python setup.py test --trilinos

or::
 
    $ mpirun -np {# of processors} python -c "import fipy; fipy.test('--trilinos')"

.. _FlagsAndEnvironmentVariables:

--------------------------------------------
Command-line Flags and Environment Variables
--------------------------------------------

:term:`FiPy` chooses a default run time configuration based on the
available packages on the system. The `Command-line Flags`_ and
`Environment Variables`_ sections below describe how to override
:term:`FiPy`'s default behavior.

.. _SOLVERCOMMANDLINEOPTIONS:

Solvers
=======

:term:`FiPy` works with either the :term:`PySparse`, :term:`Trilinos`,
:term:`Scipy` or :term:`PyAMG` solver suites (see the :ref:`solver
installation guide <SOLVERS>` for more details). :term:`FiPy` chooses
the solver suite based on system availability or based on the user
supplied `Command-line Flags`_ or `Environment Variables`_. For
example, using ``--no-pysparse``::

    $ python -c "from fipy import *; print DefaultSolver" --no-pysparse
    <class 'fipy.solvers.trilinos.linearGMRESSolver.LinearGMRESSolver'>
    
uses a :term:`Trilinos` solver and setting :envvar:`FIPY_SOLVERS`
to ``scipy``::

    $ FIPY_SOLVERS=scipy
    $ python -c "from fipy import *; print DefaultSolver"
    <class 'fipy.solvers.scipy.linearLUSolver.LinearLUSolver'>
    
uses a :term:`Scipy` solver. Suite specific solver classes can also
be imported and instantiated overriding any other directives. For
example::

    $ python -c "from fipy.solvers.scipy import DefaultSolver; \
    print DefaultSolver" --no-pysparse
    <class 'fipy.solvers.scipy.linearLUSolver.LinearLUSolver'>
    
uses a :term:`Scipy` solver regardless of the command line
argument. In the absence of `Command-line Flags`_ or `Environment
Variables`_, :term:`FiPy`'s order of precedence when choosing the
solver suite for generic solvers is :term:`PySparse` followed by
:term:`Trilinos`, :term:`PyAMG` and :term:`Scipy`.

Command-line Flags
==================

You can add any of the following flags after the name of a 
script you call from the command line

.. cmdoption:: --inline

   Causes many mathematical operations to be performed in C, rather than
   Python, for improved performance. Requires the :mod:`scipy.weave`
   package.

.. cmdoption:: --pysparse

   Forces the use of the :term:`PySparse` solvers. This flag takes precedence
   over the :envvar:`FIPY_SOLVERS` environment variable.

.. cmdoption:: --trilinos
 
   Forces the use of the :term:`Trilinos` solvers, but uses PySparse_
   to construct the matrices. This flag takes precedence over the
   :envvar:`FIPY_SOLVERS` environment variable.

.. cmdoption:: --scipy

   Forces the use of the Scipy solvers. This flag takes precedence
   over the :envvar:`FIPY_SOLVERS` environment variable.

.. cmdoption:: --pyamg

   Forces the use of the :term:`PyAMG` preconditioners in conjunction
   with the :term:`Scipy` solvers. This flag takes precedence over the
   :envvar:`FIPY_SOLVERS` environment variable.

.. cmdoption:: --no-pysparse

   Forces the use of the :term:`Trilinos` solvers without any use of
   :term:`PySparse`. This flag takes precedence over the
   :envvar:`FIPY_SOLVERS` environment variable.

Environment Variables
=====================

You can set any of the following environment variables in the manner
appropriate for your shell. If you are not running in a shell (*e.g.*,
you are invoking :term:`FiPy` scripts from within IPython_ or IDLE),
you can set these variables via the :const:`os.environ` dictionary,
but you must do so before importing anything from the :mod:`fipy`
package.

.. envvar:: FIPY_DISPLAY_MATRIX

   .. currentmodule:: fipy.terms.term

   If present, causes the graphical display of the solution matrix of each
   equation at each call of :meth:`~Term.solve` or :meth:`~Term.sweep`. If set
   to "``terms``," causes the display of the matrix for each
   :class:`Term` that composes the equation. Requires the :term:`Matplotlib`
   package.

.. envvar:: FIPY_INLINE

   If present, causes many mathematical operations to be performed in C,
   rather than Python. Requires the :mod:`scipy.weave` package.

.. envvar:: FIPY_INLINE_COMMENT

   If present, causes the addition of a comment showing the Python context
   that produced a particular piece of :mod:`scipy.weave` C code. Useful
   for debugging.

.. envvar:: FIPY_SOLVERS

   Forces the use of the specified suite of linear solvers. Valid
   (case-insensitive) choices are "``pysparse``", "``trilinos``",
   "``no-pysparse``", "``scipy``" and "``pyamg``".
    
.. envvar:: FIPY_VERBOSE_SOLVER

   If present, causes the linear solvers to print a variety of diagnostic
   information.

.. envvar:: FIPY_VIEWER

   Forces the use of the specified viewer. Valid values are any
   :samp:`{<viewer>}` from the
   :samp:`fipy.viewers.{<viewer>}Viewer`
   modules. The special value of ``dummy`` will allow the script
   to run without displaying anything.

.. envvar:: FIPY_INCLUDE_NUMERIX_ALL

   If present, causes the inclusion of all funcions and variables of the
   :mod:`~fipy.tools.numerix` module in the :mod:`fipy` namespace.

.. _PARALLEL:

-------------------
Solving in Parallel
-------------------

:term:`FiPy` can use :term:`Trilinos` to solve equations in
parallel. Most mesh classes in :mod:`fipy.meshes` can solve in
paralled. This includes all "``...Grid...``" and "``...Gmsh...``"
class meshes. Currently, the only remaining serial-only meshes are
:class:`~fipy.meshes.tri2D.Tri2D` and
:class:`~fipy.meshes.skewedGrid2D.SkewedGrid2D`.

.. attention::

   :term:`Trilinos` *must* be compiled with MPI support.

.. attention::

   :term:`FiPy` requires :ref:`MPI4PY` to work in parallel. See the
   :ref:`MPI4PY` installation guide.

.. note::

   Parallel efficiency is greatly improved by installing
   :term:`PySparse` in addition to :term:`Trilinos`. If
   :term:`PySparse` is not installed be sure to use the
   ``--no-pysparse`` flag when running in parallel.

* It should not generally be necessary to change anything in your script.
  Simply invoke::

     $ mpirun -np {# of processors} python myScript.py --trilinos

  instead of::

     $ python myScript.py

* To confirm that :term:`FiPy` and :term:`Trilinos` are properly 
  configured to solve in parallel, you can execute

  .. code-block:: python

     from fipy import parallel, Grid1D
     mesh = Grid1D(nx=10)
     print "%d cells on processor %d of %d" \
       % (mesh.getNumberOfCells(), parallel.procID, parallel.Nproc)

  (available as :file:`examples/parallel.py`) to check that :term:`FiPy` is
  distributing a mesh across processes as expected. E.g.::

     $ mpirun -np 3 python examples/parallel.py

  should print out::

     mpi4py: processor 0 of 3 :: PyTrilinos: processor 0 of 3 :: FiPy: 5 cells on processor 0 of 3
     mpi4py: processor 1 of 3 :: PyTrilinos: processor 1 of 3 :: FiPy: 7 cells on processor 1 of 3
     mpi4py: processor 2 of 3 :: PyTrilinos: processor 2 of 3 :: FiPy: 6 cells on processor 2 of 3

When solving in parallel, :term:`FiPy` essentially breaks the problem
up into separate sub-domains and solves them (somewhat) independently.
:term:`FiPy` generally "does the right thing", but if you find that
you need to do something with the entire solution, you can call
``var.``:meth:`~fipy.variables.cellVariable.CellVariable.getGlobalValue`.

.. note:: 

    :term:`Trilinos` solvers frequently give intermediate output that
    :term:`FiPy` cannot suppress. The most commonly encountered
    messages are::

     ``Gen_Prolongator warning : Max eigen <= 0.0``:
        which is not significant to :term:`FiPy`.

     ``Aztec status AZ_loss: loss of precision``:
        which indicates that there was some difficulty in solving the
        problem to the requested tolerance due to precision limitations,
        but usually does not prevent the solver from finding an adequate
        solution.

     ``Aztec status AZ_ill_cond: GMRES hessenberg ill-conditioned``:
        which indicates that GMRES is having trouble with the problem, and
        may indicate that trying a different solver or preconditioner may
        give more accurate results if GMRES fails.

     ``Aztec status AZ_breakdown: numerical breakdown``
        which usually indicates serious problems solving the equation which
        forced the solver to stop before reaching an adequate solution.
        Different solvers, different preconditioners, or a less restrictive
        tolerance may help.

.. _RunningUnderPython3:

----------------------
Running under Python 3     
----------------------

It is possible to run :term:`FiPy` scripts under :term:`Python` 3, but
you must convert :term:`FiPy`'s code before you can do so. From within
the main :term:`FiPy` directory::

    $ 2to3 --write .
    $ 2to3 --write --doctests_only .

You can expect some harmless warnings and non-terminal errors from this conversion.

The minimal prerequisites are:

 * :term:`NumPy` version 1.5 or greater.
 * :term:`SciPy` version 0.9 or greater.
 * :term:`Matplotlib` version 1.2 or greater (this hasn't been
   released yet, and we haven't been able to successfully test the
   :mod:`~.fipy.viewers.matplotlibViewer` classes with their
   development code.

There are three known failures in :term:`FiPy`'s test suite under
:term:`Python` 3:

 * `RuntimeError: Factor is exactly singular` in
   :file:`fipy.terms.unaryTerm.py`.  This is a :term:`SciPy` solver
   failure not limited to Py3k,
 * :class:`~fipy.viewers.vtkViewer.vtkCellViewer.VTKCellViewer` and
 * :class:`~fipy.viewers.vtkViewer.vtkFaceViewer.VTKFaceViewer` due to
   lack of :mod:`enthought.tvtk.api` in Py3k.

------
Manual
------

You can view the manual online at <http://www.ctcms.nist.gov/fipy> or you 
can `download the latest manual`_ from 
<http://matforge.org/fipy/wiki/FiPyManual>. Alternatively,
it may be possible to build a fresh copy by issuing the following
command in the base directory::

    $ python setup.py build_docs --pdf --html

.. note::

   This mechanism is intended primarily for the developers. At a minimum, 
   you will need a development version of `Sphinx 1.0
   <http://sphinx.pocoo.org/latest>`_, plus all of its prerequisites.

.. _download the latest manual:  http://matforge.org/fipy/wiki/FiPyManual





